.Dd Apr 15, 2010
.Dt PBI_ADD 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pbi_add
.Nd Install a PBI file
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl e
.Op Fl f
.Op Fl g
.Op Fl i
.Op Fl l
.Op Fl r
.Op Fl R
.Op Fl v
.Op Fl -checkscript
.Op Fl -licagree
.Op Fl -no-checksig
.Op Fl -no-checksum
.Op Fl -no-hash
.Op Fl -repo Ar repoid
.Op Fl -rArch Ar arch
.Op Fl -rVer Ar version
.Op Ar pbi
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The utility,
.Nm ,
installs, extracts or displays information from a pbi file 
packaged with pbi_create. 
.Sh WARNING
The pbi_add command may execute scripts or programs contained
within a PBI file. Your system may be susceptible to 'trojan horses'
or other subtle attacks from malicious developers who create dangerous
pbi files.

You are advised to verify the competence and identify of those who provide
PBI files. For extract protection, use the -e and --checkscript options 
to view archive contents and installation scripts prior to installing
a PBI file. 
.Pp
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl e
Extract only, do not install. Will extract the archive to ~/<pbidirname>
unless the -o option is used. 
.It Fl f
Force installation, overwriting an already installed copy of the application
.It Fl g
Extract image data from header commonly used for GUI installations
.It Fl i
Display information about this PBI file
.It Fl l
Display LICENSE information for this PBI file.
.It Fl o Ar outdir
Specify the directory to use when only extracting the PBI with -e.
.It Fl r
Fetch and install the PBI file from the update server. The system architecture
and version will be automatically determined to fetch the correct file. 
.It Fl R
Fetch the install file from the update server, do not install. The system architecture
and version will be automatically determined to fetch the correct file. 
.It Fl v
Enable verbose output
.It Fl -checkscript
Display any custom scripts used in the installation / removal of this PBI file. 
Recommended that these be checked if the PBI file is suspect in any way. 
.It Fl -licagree
Agree to LICENSE terms and conditions which may be required for installation. 
Viewing the license can be done with -l flag
.It Fl -no-checksig
Skip the openssl signature verification of the PBI data
.It Fl -no-checksum
Skip the checksum verification of the archive data. 
.It Fl -no-hash
Disable using the shared-hash dir, which uses hard-links to share files
between applications which are the same. 
.It Fl -repo Ar repoid
When using -r to fetch a remote PBI, the --repo flag may be used to pick a specific
repo to use. If not specified, then the repos will be searched by priority until
a PBI match is found. Repo IDs may be found with the pbi_listrepo command. 
.It Fl -rArch Ar arch
When using -r to fetch and install a PBI, the machine architecture is detected
automatically. Using the -rArch <arch> flag allows you to manually specify the 
PBI arch type you wish to install, typically set to i386/amd64. 
.It Fl -rVer Ar version
When using -r to fetch and install a PBI, the most recent version of that
application is the default. Using the -rVer <version> flag allows you to 
specify a different version to install. A listing of available applications
and versions is found with 'pbi_info -i'.
used. 
.Sh NOTES
For details about the module format, please refer to the wiki guide:
http://wiki.pcbsd.org/index.php/PBI_Module_Builder_Guide
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pbi_add 1 ,
.Xr pbi_delete 1 ,
.Xr pbi_makeport 1
