.Dd Sept 14, 2010
.Dt PBI_PATCH 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pbi_patch
.Nd Install a PBP patch file
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl e
.Op Fl g
.Op Fl i
.Op Fl o Ar outdir
.Op Fl -checkscript
.Op Fl -no-checksig
.Op Fl -no-hash
.Op Ar pbpfile 
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The utility,
.Nm ,
can be used to install a patch file (*.PBP) for PBI managed software. 
.Sh WARNING
The pbi_patch command may execute scripts or programs contained
within a PBI file. Your system may be susceptible to 'trojan horses'
or other subtle attacks from malicious developers who create dangerous
pbi files.

You are advised to verify the competence and identify of those who provide
PBI files. For extract protection, use the -e and --checkscript options 
to view archive contents and installation scripts prior to installing
a PBI file. 
.Pp
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl e
Extract only, do not install. Will extract the archive to ~/<pbidirname>
unless the -o option is used. 
.It Fl g
Extract image data from header commonly used for GUI installations
.It Fl i
Display information about this PBI file
.It Fl o Ar outdir
Specify the directory to use when only extracting the PBI with -e.
.It Fl -checkscript
Display any custom scripts used in the installation / removal of this PBI file. 
Recommended that these be checked if the PBI file is suspect in any way. 
.It Fl -no-checksig
Skip the openssl signature verification of the PBI data
.It Fl -no-hash
Disable using the shared-hash dir, which uses hard-links to share files
between applications which are the same. 
.Sh NOTES
For details about the module format, please refer to the wiki guide:
http://wiki.pcbsd.org/index.php/PBI_Module_Builder_Guide
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pbi_add 1 ,
.Xr pbi_delete 1 ,
.Xr pbi_makepatch 1
